# Research Agenda

I am working to further understanding of the applicability of Förster
Resonance Energy Transfer
([FRET](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F%C3%B6rster_resonance_energy_transfer))
as a tool for probing biomolecular systems. With this tool, I examine
the geometry and flexibility of nucleic acid polymers such as DNA and
RNA in [Lori Goldner's](http://people.umass.edu/lgoldner/goldner.html)
single-molecule biophysics group.

### Droplets for single-molecule confinement
One of the most common realizations of FRET experiment is by studying
fluorescently-labelled freely-diffusing molecules under a common light
microscope. While this approach can give details of kinetics and
geometry for an ensemble, the inability to follow individual specimens
precludes the study of dynamics of small numbers of molecules
especially over long durations.

Building off of a technique developed by Goldner at the
[NIST](http://www.nist.gov/), we use colloidal droplets as a means of
containing fluorescently labelled molecules. By way of a novel
particle tracking system, we can observe single-molecules contained
within a droplet for minutes at a time, greatly extending the timescales
accessible to single-molecule FRET. <!-- Mention oligomeric studies? -->

### Probabilistic analysis for better inference
By applying tools developed in the fields of statistics and machine
learning, I seek to draw more meaningful and efficient inferences from
experimental data. I use probabilistic graphical models along with
Bayesian inference to construct generative models for photon
data. This generative approach enables me to account for a variety of
phenomena in a principled yet computationally tractable manner.

<!--
While FRET provides a useful view onto the slow fluctuations and large
changes of a molecule, resolution of fast dynamics, particularly of
the fluorophores themselves, is well beyond the reach of the
technique. These dynamics can often have significant implications on
the information content of the resulting experimental data. We
employ atomistic molecular dynamics simulations to shed light on these
fast processes, allowing us to more effectively understand the
applicability of our inferences.
-->

The time scales of events that can be studied with FRET is
limited. From physical models we expect our observations to be
perturbed by fast dynamics. In order to account for these
effects we employ atomistic molecular dynamics simulations to shed
light on these fast processes, allowing us to understand under which
constraints our inference is valid.


### Science should be open
Open access to hardware and software is essential for an open and
reproducible scientific dialogue. In pursuit of this goal, 
I make the components of my experimental apparatus and analysis
pipeline available for reuse and modification. One example of this 
is the freely available
[`fpga-timetagger`](http://goldnerlab.physics.umass.edu/wiki/FpgaTimeTagger),
designed around an inexpensive off-the-shelf FPGA for use in
single-photon counting applications. The design and associated
software is available under an open-source license and serves as the
primary data acquisition platform for my experimental work.

Additionally, all of my analysis code can be found on the group
[git repository](http://goldnerlab.physics.umass.edu/git/index.cgi)
If you are interested in any of the projects you find, don't hesitate
to send me an email.

## Relevant publications
  * ["MD Simulations and FRET Studies of Dye-Labeled RNA"](http://goldnerlab.physics.umass.edu/~peker/2011%20biophys%20Milas%20Poster.pdf)
    (poster at Biophysical Society meeting, 2011)
  * ["From force-fields to photons: MD simulations of dye-labaled nucleic acids and Monte Carlo modelling of FRET"](http://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/NEF11/Event/158326)
    (poster at APS March Meeting, 2011)
  * Gamari, *et al.* "Inexpensive hardware and software for photon
    statistics and correlation spectroscopy"
    [arXiv:1206.3332](http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.3332) (submitted to
    *American Journal of Physics*)


