---
title: Building BeagleDAQ and Tracker environment
description: Compiling the software environment for the BeagleDAQ and particle tracker
tags: beagledaq, linaro
date: 2011-10-16
---

# Building BeagleDAQ and Tracker environment

## BeagleDAQ
### Introduction

The BeagleDAQ system is based around the
[BeagleBoard](http://www.beagleboard.org/) single-board computer. This device
is a small computer with an ARM processor, similar to the one likely in your
smart phone. Like most computers, the BeagleBoard needs an operating system to
be useful. This is almost always Linux. The operating system is stored on a
MicroSD card which is inserted in a slot on the side of the board.

While any Linux distribution can be used on the BeagleBoard, I prefer to use
[Linaro's](http://www.linaro.org/) Ubuntu distribution due to its ease of use,
excellent packaging and good documentation.

### Linaro Image
While there is a fair bit of documentation in the Linaro
[Wiki](http://wiki.linaro.org/) (e.g.
<https://wiki.linaro.org/Platform/DevPlatform/Ubuntu/ImageInstallation>), I'll
briefly outline the process here as well. The image creation process should be
conducted on an Ubuntu machine.

First, let's install the `linaro-image-tools` package, which we'll need later
in the process,

        $ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:linaro-maintainers/tools
        $ sudo apt-get update
        $ sudo apt-get install linaro-image-tools

A Linaro image consists of two components,

 * A hardware pack providing details about the platform (e.g. BeagleBoard)
 * The Linaro distribution tarball

Both of these components can be downloaded from the Linaro
[releases](http://releases.linaro.org/platform/) server. There are several
flavors of Linaro's Ubuntu distribution; I generally choose `developer` (e.g.
<http://releases.linaro.org/platform/linaro-n/developer/latest/>). The names of these files should look something like the following,

 * Hardware pack: `hwpack_linaro-omap3_20110729-1_armel_supported.tar.gz`
 * Distribution: `developer-n-tar-20110728-1.tar.gz`

To build the image, one must have the target SD card inserted into the SD card
reader. This device will generally be known as `/dev/sdb`, although the last
letter could change depending upon the machine. It is critical that you
double-check the name of the SD card as otherwise you could easily overwrite
data on the machine you are working on. To build the image (assuming the files listed above are used),

        $ sudo linaro-media-create --rootfs ext3 --mmc /dev/sdb --binary developer-n-tar-20110728-1.tar.gz --hwpack hwpack_linaro-omap3_20110729-1_armel_supported.tar.gz --dev beagle

### BeagleDAQ kernel
The BeagleDAQ hardware requires a few modifications to the Linux kernel to work properly.

TODO


## Tracker
The particle tracker (`pytracker`) depends upon a low-level library, `libbeagledaq`, to communicate with the BeagleDAQ hardware. First, we install this and its dependencies,

        $ sudo apt-get install libboost-dev
        $ cd
        $ git clone git@goldnerlab:libbeagledaq
        $ cd libbeagledaq
        $ make
        $ sudo make install

Now we install `pytracker`,

        $ sudo apt-get install python-dev python-scipy
        $ cd
        $ git clone git@goldnerlab:pytracker
        $ cd pytracker
        $ ./setup.py build

