---
title: What I want in a laptop
date: 2020-08-22
tags: hardware
description: "Notes from considering my priorities when looking for a new laptop"
---

Recently I have been rather disappointed by the state of the laptop market.
While I have been wanting to replace my aging Dell Latitude E7470 (an otherwise
great laptop), either vendors have badly misunderstood how technical users use
their products or I am somehow have extraordinarily strange requirements.

In an effort to help determine which of these is possibilities is the case, I
thought it would be helpful to put in writing my criteria.  In the unlikely
event that someone working for one of these companies stumbles across this,
below is my rubric for evaluating laptops, roughly in order of
importance. Hopefully this should shed light on what constitutes a usable
machine to someone such as myself

* *32 gigabytes of RAM*. Looking at my current session, Firefox alone is chewing
  through 8 gigabytes; a Jupyter notebook session another 3 gigabytes, various
  other processes constitute another 4 gigabytes. 16 gigabytes of memory in 2020
  is utterly inadequate. I don't mind performing the memory upgrade myself but
  sadly with the recent trend of soldered-in RAM this is not always an option.

* *a bright, reasonably high resolution display.* I often work outside;
  anything less than 400 nits is painful at best. Likewise, I work with text: I
  don't need high fidelity color or ultra-fast response-time. Just give me a
  bright panel with enough pixels to comfortably display a few columns of code
  in `vim`. 1920 x 1080 is the minimum that I would use.

  My last few Latitudes have spoiled me with touchscreens, although this is
  not strictly necessary.

* *14-inch form-factor and reasonable weight*. I bring my laptop everywhere;
  it should be tote-able and of a reasonable weight (3 pounds is fine; I'd much
  rather have sufficient robustness and cooling than something lighter-than-air)

* *for the love of all that is good, no nVidia GPU.* I've been subjected to the
  torture that is nVidia's Linux support before; this is not a mistake I am
  willing to repeat. Integrated or discrete, I don't care; it just needs to
  work.

* *functional firmware.* I shouldn't need to say this but this means no ACPI
  quirks; S3 suspend and S4 hibernation should just work. The fact that I do
  not use Windows is not an excuse for the machine does not running as
  advertised.

* *a usable keyboard*. I really don't have high expectations; I'm not a
  mechnical keyboard afficianato. However, it shouldn't feel like I'm typing on
  porridge. Equally bad is the sub-micron key actuation distance of
  recent Apple hardware. Needless to say, a keyboard must be tolerant of crumbs
  and the occassional splash.

  A keyboard backlight is invaluable for working in dark areas.

* *solid build quality*. The machine will be used. Indoors, outdoors, in tents,
  on boats, on hikes, sideways, upside-down... It will not have an easy life
  and drops happen. A plastic chassis is unlikely to cut the mustard. Chassis creaking
  is a very bad sign. The display should not oscillate due to typing vibrations.

* *battery capacity*. It should be possible to edit code away from an outlet
  for at least eight hours. Thankfully, with today's hardware this isn't a
  particularly difficult requirement to meet.

* *A sensible array of ports*. At very least:
  * two display outputs (preferably one HDMI, one DisplayPort). 
  * three USB
  * ideally gigabit Ethernet
  * combined analog headphone/microphone 3.5mm jack

  I don't particularly care how the device is charged; perhaps USB-PD would be
  nice but have not felt particularly burdened by having a dedicated charger.
  Moreover, a dedicated charge port has the advantage of side-stepping the
  compatibility and labelling nightmare that is USB.

* *repairable*. I do not believe in throw-away items, especially in something
  as environmentally damaging as a computer. Consequently, I expect this
  investment to last for at least five years. Things will break; it should be
  possible to fix them. Parts need to be readily available.  Disassembly should
  be reasonably easy and not require special tools.

* *mature industrial design*. A laptop is a tool, not a Las Vegas light show.
  Gaudy "gamer" aesthetics are an immediate disqualifier.

* *a fast-ish CPU*. I usually work via SSH but it is still sometimes necessary to
  run a build locally. With AMD's recent Renoir CPUs, there is no excuse not to
  have a reasonably speedy CPU.

* *a touchpoint*: A good touchpoint is far easier to control than a touchpad
  (particularly relative to click-pads) and is accessible from the home-row.
  Sadly (and somewhat inexplicably) these are becoming somewhat rare.
