---
title: Retrospective on the Thinkpad T14s
date: 2023-10-03
tags: hardware
description: "My experiences with the Thinkpad T14s"
---

Around three years ago I wrote a
[post](2020-08-22-what-i-want-in-a-laptop.html) describing my criteria for
selecting a laptop, a post I wrote that post while in the process of selecting
a replacement for my Dell Latitude E7470. The outcome of that search was the
generation 1 ThinkPad T14s AMD. This post will be a retrospective on my
experiences with this laptop.

## Hardware compromises

The ThinkPad T14s was, at best, a compromise. As I do lots of [rather heavy GHC
builds](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc) I generally work on larger machines
via SSH. However, this laptop was an experiment to determine whether AMD's
(then) new Zen architecture was enough of a performance uptick to make working
locally viable.

When I bought this laptop in 2020 good AMD-based options were somewhat few and
far between. This is especially true due to my strong preference to stay within
the set of "corporate fleet" models [^1]. Consequently, I had to give up a few
points in my usual criteria:

 * LCD panel: the T14s's panel is 1920x1080, the bare minimum of what I
   consider to be acceptable. Furthermore, the brightness is marginal at best.
   Working in the sun is not easy.

 * Ethernet: The T14s has a "dongle" but no in-built RJ-45 jack. While I can
   see why this is the case given the geometry of the chassis, I find this
   trend towards "thinner at all costs" to be unfortunate

 * touch screen: I quite liked the touch screen of my E7470; it was a very
   convenient (and less strain-inducing) mode of interaction (especially for
   gross movements like scrolling)

 * repairability: The Lenovo is not great, which is a point I will come to

Despite these shortcomings, the Thinkpad has been an decent machine. Battery
life is not stellar but better than my last machine (although battery quality wasn't
great; I noticed palmrest bulging around 18 months into the life of the machine
which rompted battery replacement). The firmware is largely bug free and does
what it should do (at least after disabling suspend-to-idle). CPU performance
is good and while the machine does get warm it does not throttle even during a
long GHC build.

I found that the lack of ports was manageable with a USB C docking
station. Unfortunately, the fact that the primary USB C port is used
for both docking station and standalone charging is a durability concern. I
have already had one motherboard replacement due to the USB C port becoming
unmanagably finicky and I expect another will be necessary in less than 18 months.

The USB C problem is frustrating as it is completely predictable; there is no
way that a 9mm-by-3mm connector carrying dozens of Watts and several gigabytes
per second over a handful of differential pairs can maintain its design
parameters for more than a couple of years with several actuations per day *and*
the mechanical rigors that a charging port sees. I still miss the days of
dedicated, robust charging ports.

In addition to having to give up RJ45 for thickness, chassis geometry also
apparently required some compromises in internal connectors as the
motherboard's m.2 slot does not comfortably accomodate double-sided SSDs. This
greatly limits SSD options at higher capacities and is particularly problematic
as most drive vendors do not clearly mark whether a particular model is single- or
double-sided.

## Build quality

Ultimately, the biggest problems with the T14s are its build
quality and serviceability. While machine's magnesium chassis gives it a solid first impression, its durability has left much to be desired. The first failure I had less
than a year into the life of the machine, when the backspace key became
intermittent.

Like most modern laptops, keyboard replacement on the T14s is a pain as it
requires removing the screen assembly, battery and motherboard (that is, nearly every component of the machine). However, Lenovo takes this a bit
further by rivetting the keyboard to the palmrest, turning what is
usually a $30 USD keyboard replacement into a > $100 palmrest/touchpad/keyboard
assembly. While this is Lenovo's cost to bear and not mine, I am not pleased with the
thought of this entire assembly unnecessarily entering a landfill.
This design decision suggests that the machine has been excessively
cost-optimised; I would happily pay the extra $2 for a few threaded inserts
and some M2.5 screws.

To make matters worse, this "intermittent backspace" problem has started to
recur less than two years later. It appears
[that](https://www.reddit.com/r/thinkpad/comments/oee9od/space_enter_backspace_randomly_failing_in_t14s/)
[this](https://www.reddit.com/r/thinkpad/comments/mlfcn4/issue_with_t14s_keyboard/)
[failure](https://www.reddit.com/r/thinkpad/comments/ky2gxv/t14s_amd_issue_with_unresponsive_returnbackspace/)
[mode](https://www.reddit.com/r/thinkpad/comments/ownqq8/t14s_amd_enter_and_backspace_stop_working/)
[is](https://www.reddit.com/r/thinkpad/comments/ipghgi/t14s_backspace_and_enter_key_drops_out/)
*extremely* common. To say that flaky keyboard input from a $1900 machine is
merely "disappointing" would be a tremendous understatement.

To make matters worse the screen assembly, while rigid (i.e. does not oscillate
during typing), is quite weakly coupled to the hinges. I found this out the
hard way when the placing the machine firmly on a table while the screen was
wide open: The sudden torque this placed on the hinges was enough to cause one
side of the bezel to fail which lead to an eventual LCD panel failure.
This is the sort of failure that one that simply should not happen and seems
directly tied to the machine's thin design.

## Service

Throughout my experience with the laptop,  my experience with Lenovo's service
department has been poor. Repair of the LCD failure took no less than
two months and four service visits (during much of which the machine was usable
only via external display). The first keyboard repair took one month and three
visits; the I am still waiting on a service visit for the second keyboard
failure. In both cases, repeated logistical failures (that is, sending the
*wrong* part or not sending *enough* parts) as well as long part lead times
contributed heavily to the poor experience.

Sadly Lenovo, in contrast to Dell, does not seem to support parts-only
self-service. This is a shame since parts-only service seems like a win for
both sides:

 * the OEM does not need to pay for an expensive field service technician
 * the customer does not need to coordinate time-and-place with the technician
 * the customer does not need to wait for technician availability and can
   perform the repair as soon as parts are available
 * the customer can perform the repair without time pressure

I bring up the last point in particular because the two-month LCD failure
ordeal was greatly worsened by the fact that the LCD assembly replacement was
escalated to a motherboard replacement due to the breakage of the eDP connector.
To be clear, the technician is not to blame here; rather, I the problem
is an incentive structure which places technicians on a fixed schedule to
perform repairs of unknown duration. Mistakes become more likely when you are
approaching the end of your time-box for a given customer's repair and still
need to eat lunch and make it to your next appointment on time.

I recognize that not all laptop users can or should be working inside of their
machines, but as someone who has performed countless repairs on everything from
laptops, to dishwashers, to cell phones, I greatly appreciate having the option
available.

## The future

Modern electronics exact a severe cost on our planet. Moreover, the majority
of a laptop's environment impact has already been committed by the time it
arrives at the customer's door: the embodied carbon of a modern laptop is
roughly 350 kg-CO2eq whereas the "variable cost" of operating it is
relatively small (in the US, 5W of electricity costs roughly 10 kg-CO2eq per year).
For this reason, I typically prefer to have laptops to last at least five years.

However, while my T14s is only barely three years old, I am growing tired of the
Lenovo experiment: Both the machine itself and Lenovo support have lost my trust.
Naturally, as Murphy would predict, failures inevitably happen directly
prior to travel. This situation is simply untenable.

On the other hand, I am thrilled that there is finally a vendor,
[Framework](https://frame.work/), which seems to align with my preferences. A
few months ago I put in an order for an AMD-based Framework 13. Initial
indications seem to suggest that the hardware is solid; time will tell.


[^1]:
    This preference for corporate fleet laptops was a lesson from my days of
    using Dell models where I found that "consumer" and "professional" support
    departments are (at least in the case of Dell) completely different
    divisions of the company which have vastly different stances towards their
    users.

    The Dell support consumer/professional support distinction is not merely an
    organizational difference: in my experience attempting to extract a repair
    out of the consumer support department was invariably an arduous exercise of
    being walked through an lengthy (and largely inapplicable) diagnosis script
    by someone who spends their days working with a largely
    technically-illiterate user-base. May the gods help you if you
    inadvertently admit to the rep that the machine is not running Windows.
 
    By contrast, my interactions with Dell's corporate support department were
    largely efficient and unproblematic. Generally I would tell them my
    self-diagnosis of the problem and they would dispatch a service call or,
    even better, just parts for self-service; no further discussion needed.
    This is because these reps are conditioned to expect technically competent
    corporate IT department employees on the other end of the line. They
    understand that the machine is a vital tool for the user, not an appliance
    for occassionally watching cat videos and must work ASAP. They are not
    (quite as) surprised by non-Windows environments, and generally
    recognize when an issue is clearly operating-system agnostic.

    This difference, coupled with the fact that my first laptop, a Dell
    Inspiron, suffered from *extremely* poor build quality resulted in my
    current stance.

[^2]:
    To make matters worse, Lenovo
