---
title: Toner transfer PCB etching in a (bio)physics laboratory
tags: pcb, etch, toner transfer
date: 2012-01-20
---

# Toner transfer PCB etching in a (bio)physics laboratory

While with the recent advent of [batch PCB services](http://www.batchpcb.com)
one-off PCB etching has become remarkable inexpensive. That being said,
sometimes you need the board yesterday. Also PCB etching can be quite
convenient even for simple circuits, where point-to-point prototyping would be
possible but labor intensive. Moreover, the use of even large (1206) surface
mount parts allow the board to be much smaller than possible with other
prototyping methods.

Thankfully, in a laboratory setting one is blessed with a variety of tools and
materials that most homes do not have.

One unfortunate limitation of the toner transfer method is the difficulty of
producing double-sided boards. While it is in principle possible 

# Overview

The toner-transfer method exploits the inability of laser printers to bind
toner to glossy paper (e.g. photo paper). I have had good luck with all of the
photo papers I have tried and have even used magazine paper before (although
its light weight made handling and printing tricky). The procedure goes roughly
as follows,

 1. Print a mask on glossy paper
 2. Transfer mask to board
 3. Etch
 4. Post-processing

Board material (known as copper-clad board) consists of a sheet of substrate
material (usually FR-4 (fiberglass and epoxy) or phenolic plastic) plated on
either one or both sides with a thin layer of copper.  The board I generally
use is available from RadioShack, although this is something that can also be
found for quite cheap on eBay. While many of the items on eBay have surface
blemishes, this largely doesn't matter since we will be conducting an extensive
surface preparation process anyways.

# Producing the Mask

I use the wonderful [gEDA](http://www.gpleda.org/) EDA package and I would
strongly recommend it to anyone looking into a designing a board. While its
learning curve is a little steep and integration between tools is sometimes a
bit weak, to anyone used to working in a UNIX environment it should be easy to
pick up and unmatched in its flexibility.

When using producing a board, I like to give myself wide tolerances to make the
process more forgiving. I prefer to use 12 mil clearances on all traces and
parts. This can be set by selected all parts on the layout (`Alt-A`) and typing
`:MinClearGap(Selected, =12, mil)`.

Recall when laying down your PCB design that through-hole components should be
on the opposite side from your traces. 

To produce a mask in PCB, one first exports the board to a Postscript file
(`File -> Export Layout`, select `PS`, default settings are fine). This will
produce a document with each of the layers nice formatted with alignment marks.

One thing which has tricked me numerous times in the past has been mirroring of
the image. For this reason, I will always print a "dry-run" copy of the front
mask along with the assembly diagram on standard paper. Laminating these
together with print facing out should look just like the final board. I verify that
parts' chiralities are correct and that vias line up with this test "board"
before printing my final transfer mask.

# Surface preparation

Before the mask can be transferred, the surface of the PCB material must be
cleaned and prepared. One unfortunate property of copper is that it oxidizes
extremely quickly. This layer of copper oxide will not be etched by the etchant
and will be unsolderable. Also, for obvious reasons, the board must be free of
grease and other dirt before the mask transfer.

 1. Roughen the surface slightly with medium abrasive such as fine grid
    sandpaper or medium steelwool.

 2. Drop the board in an organic solvent (e.g. acetone, methanol, or even
    ethanol; purity doesn't matter) for 5 minutes or so. This will remove any
    residual grease.

 3. Rinse in water

 4. Drop the board in a acid bath for 10 minutes. I usually use a HCl solution
    with a pH of about 3, although this shouldn't be picky. This will remove
    any copper oxide remaining on the surface.

# Printing and transferring the mask
 
Print the final transfer mask on glossy paper on a laser printer and cut it
down to the size of the board. If possible, increase the toner density of the
print (on my printer, an HP LaserJet P2015dn, this involved setting the "Image
Quality" setting to "Highest"). I generally wait to do this until I have
everything prepared for the transfer.

For the transfer, I use a piece of optical breadboard on a Fisher Scientific
heat plate set at 200 Celcius. This ensures I have a nice flat surface with
large thermal mass. On top of this I place my board and printed mask (with mask
on top facing the board). On this I place another sheet of flat aluminum with a
heavy catalog for weight. After allowing the board and mask to heat up for five
minutes or so, I'll use a cylindrical roller (e.g. New Focus optical rod) to
press the mask on. I'll then wait another five minutes and repeat. Ensure that
every point on the mask has been compressed.

After pressing and waiting several times (usually this takes about 20 minutes),
I'll pull the board off the heater and put it in a bath of warm water, where it
soaks for at least 10 minutes. This makes it much easier to remove the paper
without pulling off the mask. You should be able to remove the first layers of
paper by rubbing with your fingers. After the first layer is remove, allow the
board to soak for another 10 minutes before removing the remaining paper.  
Paper still remaining between small features (e.g. traces) can be removed
with a pointed object but try not to damage the copper.

This part of the procedure is quite sensitive and it's worth spending time to
avoid removing any more of the mask than necessary. That being said, if part of
the mask does come off with the paper, this can be easily corrected with a
black Sharpie (other colors haven't been tested). Make sure the area is
thoroughly marked with the Sharpie as experience has shown that Sharpie ink
doesn't resist the etchant as well as toner.

# Etch

Copper can be etched with a variety of liquid etchants. I use a ferric chloride
solution from Radioshack, although a little Googling should demonstrate that
any laboratory with some basic chemicals should have what is necessary to
produce an etchant solution. If I had not already started using my ferric
chloride, I would probably use a [copper chloride in HCl
solution](http://www.instructables.com/id/Stop-using-Ferric-Chloride-etchant!--A-better-etc/).

When using ferric chloride be careful to avoid touching the solution with
anything you don't want stained. Ferric chloride can be 

After allowing the board to dry, throw the board in a bath of etchant and
agitate. I use a rocking platform this which works quite nicely. Keep a careful
eye on the etching process and flip over the board a few times while etching
(the top usually etches more quickly than the bottom). I find that a good etch
usually takes around 10 minutes, although this will heavily depend upon the
strength of your etchant. 

# Post-processing

Removing the toner from the etched board can be accomplished by a combination
of solvents (e.g. acetone) and mechanical abrasion (e.g. a Scotch-Brite pad).

To drill you can use any suitably sized drill bits (you'll almost certainly
need more than one for usual via-sized holes) and a drill-press. The board will
have a tendency to "jump" after drilling through the bottom of the substrate,
so be sure to hold it securely. I use a set of #63 (0.0370")
PCB drills purchased on eBay, although it would be nice if they were a
tad smaller. Drill with the traces facing upwards and ensure the bottom of the
board is supported with a piece of wood, otherwise the board substrate has a
nasty tendency to crack. It never hurts to drill more slowly.

Finally, I like to tin all of the traces of the board right after etching to
ensure they don't oxidize. This makes soldering to the board much easier after
it has sat for a while. Also, especially with large holes, getting through-hole
parts to wet to the board is sometimes difficult. This is made much easier by
pre-wetting the pins of any through-hole parts before soldering.

